for some time i have been interested in the placebo effect , which might seem like an odd thing for a magician to be interested in , unless you think of it in the terms that i do , which is , `` something fake is believed in enough by somebody that it becomes something real . '' 
in other words , sugar pills have a measurable effect in certain kinds of studies , the placebo effect , just because the person thinks that what 's happening to them is a pharmaceutical or some sort of a -- for pain management , for example , if they believe it enough there is a measurable effect in the body called the placebo effect . 
something fake becomes something real because of someone 's perception of it . 
in order for us to understand each other , i want to start by showing you a rudimentary , very simple magic trick . 
and i 'm going to show you how it works . this is a trick that 's been in every children 's magic book since at least the 1950s . 
i learned it myself from cub scout magic in the 1970s . 
i 'll do it for you , and then i 'll explain it . 
and then i 'll explain why i explained it . 
so , here 's what happens . 
the knife , which you can examine ; my hand , which you could examine . 
i 'm just going to hold the knife in my fist like this . 
i 'll get my sleeve back . 
and to make sure nothing goes up or down my sleeve i 'm just going to squeeze my wrist right here . 
that way you can see that at no time can anything travel , as long as i 'm squeezing there nothing can go up or down my sleeve . 
and the object of this is quite simple . 
i 'm going to open my hand , and hopefully , if all is well , my pure animal magnetism will hold the knife . 
in fact it 's held so tightly in place that i can shake it , and the knife does not come off . 
nothing goes up or down my sleeve , no trickery . and you can examine everything . 
ta-da ! 
so , this is a trick that i often teach to young children that are interested in magic , because you can learn a great deal about deception by studying this very -- even though it 's a very simple trick methodologically . 
probably many of you in the room know this trick . 
what happens is this . 
i hold the knife in my hand . 
i say i 'm going to grab hold of my wrist to make sure nothing goes up or down my sleeve , that is a lie . 
the reason i 'm holding onto my wrist is because that 's actually the secret of the illusion . 
in a moment when my hand moves from facing you to being away from you , this finger right here , my index finger is just going to shift from where it is , to a position pointing out like this . 
nice one . 
someone who did n't have a childhood is out there . 
so , it goes like this , from here , right . 
and as i move around my finger shifts . 
and we could talk about why this is deceptive , why you do n't notice there are only three fingers down here , because the mind , and the way it processes information , it does n't count , one , two , three . it groups them . 
but that 's not really what this is about . right ? and then i open my hand up . 
obviously it 's clinging there , not by animal magnetism , but by chicanery , my index finger being there . 
and then when i close my finger , same thing , as i move back , this motion kind of covers the moving back of my finger . 
i take this hand away . you give the knife out . 
there is a trick you can do for your friends and neighbors . thanks . 
now , what does that have to do with the placebo effect ? 
i read a study a year or so ago that really blew my mind wide open . 
i 'm not a doctor or a researcher , so this , to me , was an astonishing thing . 
it turns out that if you administer a placebo in the form of a white pill , that 's like aspirin shaped -- it 's just a round white pill -- it has some certain measurable effect . 
but if you change the form that you give the placebo in , like you make a smaller pill , and color it blue , and stamp a letter into it , it is actually measurably more effective . 
even though neither one of these things has any pharmaceutical -- they 're sugar pills . 
but a white pill is not as good as a blue pill . 
what ? that really flipped me out . 
turns out though , that that 's not even where it stops . 
if you have capsules , they 're more effective than tablets in any form . 
a colored capsule , that 's yellow on one end and red on the other is better than a white capsule . 
dosage has something to do with this . 
one pill twice a day is not as good at three pills -- i do n't remember the statistic now . sorry . 
but the point is ... 
... these dosages have something to do with it . 
and the form has something to do with it . 
and if you want the ultimate in placebo , you 've go to the needle . 
right ? a syringe with some inert -- a couple ccs of some inert something , and you inject this into a patient ... 
well this is such a powerful image in their mind , it 's so much stronger than the white pill . 
it 's a really , this graph , well i 'll show it to you some other time when we have slides . 
the point is the white pill is not as good as the blue pill is not as good as the capsule is not as good as the needle . 
and none of it has any real pharmaceutical quality , it 's only your belief that makes it real in your body and makes a stronger effect . 
i wanted to see if i could take that idea and apply it to a magic trick . 
and take something that is obviously a fake trick and make it seem real . 
and we know from that study that when you want reality , you go to the needle . 
this is a seven-inch hatpin . it 's very , very sharp , and i 'm going to just sterilize it a tiny bit . 
this is really my flesh . this is not damian 's special-grown flesh . 
that 's my skin right there . this is not a hollywood special effect . 
i 'm going to pierce my skin and run this needle through to the other side . 
if you 're queasy -- if you faint easily -- i was doing this for some friends in the hotel room last night , and some people that i did n't know , and one woman almost passed out . 
so , i suggest if you get queasy easy that you look away for about the next 30 -- in fact , you know what , i 'll do the first bad part behind it . 
you 'll get to see , you can look away too if you 'd like to . 
so , here is what happens , right here , the beginning of my flesh at the lower part of my arm i just make a little pierce . 
i 'm sorry , man . am i freaking you out ? 
ok , and then just through my skin a tiny bit , and then out the other side like this . 
now , essentially we 're in the same position we were in with the knife trick . 
sort of . 
but you ca n't count my fingers right now can you ? 
so , let me show them to you . that 's one , two three , four , five . 
yes , well ... 
i know what people think when they see this . 
they go , `` well , he 's certainly not dumb enough to stab himself through the skin to entertain us for a few minutes . 
so , let me give you a little peek . 
how 's that look out there ? pretty good . 
yeah , i know . 
and the people in the back go , `` ok , i did n't really see that . '' 
people in the satellite room are starting to move in now . 
let me give you good close look at this . 
that really is my skin . that is not a hollywood special effect . 
that 's my flesh , and i can twist that around . 
i 'm sorry . if you 're getting queasy , look away , do n't look at the thing . 
people in the back or people on video years from now watching this will go , `` well yeah , that looks kind of neat in some sort of effect there , but if it were real he would be -- see there 's a hole there and a hole there , if it were real he would be bleeding . 
well let me work up some blood for you . 
yes , there it is . 
normally now , i would take the needle out . 
i would clean off my arm , and i would show you that there are no wounds . 
but i think in this context and with the idea of taking something fake and making it into something real , i 'm just going to leave it there , and walk off the stage . 
i will be seeing you several times over the next few days . 
i hope you 're looking forward to that . thank you very much . 
i want to start out by asking you to think back to when you were a kid , playing with blocks . 
as you figured out how to reach out and grasp , pick them up and move them around , you were actually learning how to think and solve problems by understanding and manipulating spatial relationships . 
spatial reasoning is deeply connected to how we understand a lot of the world around us . 
so , as a computer scientist inspired by this utility of our interactions with physical objects -- along with my adviser pattie , and my collaborator jeevan kalanithi -- i started to wonder -- what if when we used a computer , instead of having this one mouse cursor that was a like a digital fingertip moving around a flat desktop , what if we could reach in with both hands and grasp information physically , arranging it the way we wanted ? 
this question was so compelling that we decided to explore the answer , by building siftables . 
in a nutshell , a siftable is an interactive computer the size of a cookie . 
they 're able to be moved around by hand , they can sense each other , they can sense their motion , and they have a screen and a wireless radio . 
most importantly , they 're physical , so like the blocks , you can move them just by reaching out and grasping . 
and siftables are an example of a new ecosystem of tools for manipulating digital information . 
and as these tools become more physical , more aware of their motion , aware of each other , and aware of the nuance of how we move them , we can start to explore some new and fun interaction styles . 
so , i 'm going to start with some simple examples . 
this siftable is configured to show video , and if i tilt it in one direction , it 'll roll the video this way ; if i tilt it the other way it rolls it backwards . 
and these interactive portraits are aware of each other . 
so if i put them next to each other , they get interested . 
if they get surrounded , they notice that too , they might get a little flustered . 
and they can also sense their motion and tilt . 
one of the interesting implications on interaction , we started to realize , was that we could use everyday gestures on data , like pouring a color the way we might pour a liquid . 
so in this case , we 've got three siftables configured to be paint buckets and i can use them to pour color into that central one , where they get mixed . 
if we overshoot , we can pour a little bit back . 
there are also some neat possibilities for education , like language , math and logic games where we want to give people the ability to try things quickly , and view the results immediately . 
so here i 'm -- this is a fibonacci sequence that i 'm making with a simple equation program . 
here we have a word game that 's kind of like a mash-up between scrabble and boggle . 
basically , in every round you get a randomly assigned letter on each siftable , and as you try to make words it checks against a dictionary . 
then , after about 30 seconds , it reshuffles , and you have a new set of letters and new possibilities to try . 
so these are some kids that came on a field trip to the media lab , and i managed to get them to try it out , and shoot a video . 
they really loved it . 
and , one of the interesting things about this kind of application is that you do n't have to give people many instructions . 
all you have to say is , `` make words , '' and they know exactly what to do . 
so here 's another few people trying it out . 
that 's our youngest beta tester , down there on the right . 
turns out , all he wanted to do was to stack the siftables up . 
so to him , they were just blocks . 
now , this is an interactive cartoon application . 
and we wanted to build a learning tool for language learners . 
and this is felix , actually . 
and he can bring new characters into the scene , just by lifting the siftables off the table that have that character shown on them . 
here , he 's bringing the sun out . 
the sun is rising . 
now he 's brought a tractor into the scene . 
the orange tractor . 
good job ! yeah ! 
so by shaking the siftables and putting them next to each other he can make the characters interact -- woof ! 
inventing his own narrative . 
hello ! 
it 's an open-ended story , and he gets to decide how it unfolds . 
fly away , cat . 
so , the last example i have time to show you today is a music sequencing and live performance tool that we 've built recently , in which siftables act as sounds like lead , bass and drums . 
each of these has four different variations , you get to choose which one you want to use . 
and you can inject these sounds into a sequence that you can assemble into the pattern that you want . 
and you inject it by just bumping up the sound siftable against a sequence siftable . 
there are effects that you can control live , like reverb and filter . 
you attach it to a particular sound and then tilt to adjust it . 
and then , overall effects like tempo and volume that apply to the entire sequence . 
so let 's have a look . 
we 'll start by putting a lead into two sequence siftables , arrange them into a series , extend it , add a little more lead . 
now i put a bass line in . 
now i 'll put some percussion in . 
and now i 'll attach the filter to the drums , so i can control the effect live . 
i can speed up the whole sequence by tilting the tempo one way or the other . 
and now i 'll attach the filter to the bass for some more expression . 
i can rearrange the sequence while it plays . 
so i do n't have to plan it out in advance , but i can improvise , making it longer or shorter as i go . 
and now , finally , i can fade the whole sequence out using the volume siftable , tilted to the left . 
so , as you can see , my passion is for making new human-computer interfaces that are a better match to the ways our brains and bodies work . 
and today , i had time to show you one point in this new design space , and a few of the possibilities that we 're working to bring out of the laboratory . 
so the thought i want to leave you with is that we 're on the cusp of this new generation of tools for interacting with digital media that are going to bring information into our world on our terms . 
i look forward to talking with all of you . 
one day , los angeles times columnist steve lopez was walking along the streets of downtown los angeles when he heard beautiful music . 
and the source was a man , an african-american man , charming , rugged , homeless , playing a violin that only had two strings . 
and i 'm telling a story that many of you know , because steve 's columns became the basis for a book , which was turned into a movie , with robert downey jr. acting as steve lopez , and jamie foxx as nathaniel anthony ayers , the juilliard-trained double bassist whose promising career was cut short by a tragic affliction with paranoid schizophrenia . 
nathaniel dropped out of juilliard , he suffered a complete breakdown , and 30 years later he was living homeless on the streets of skid row in downtown los angeles . 
i encourage all of you to read steve 's book or to watch the movie to understand not only the beautiful bond that formed between these two men , but how music helped shape that bond , and ultimately was instrumental -- if you 'll pardon the pun -- in helping nathaniel get off the streets . 
i met mr. ayers in 2008 , two years ago , at walt disney concert hall . 
he had just heard a performance of beethoven 's first and fourth symphonies , and came backstage and introduced himself . 
he was speaking in a very jovial and gregarious way about yo-yo ma and hillary clinton and how the dodgers were never going to make the world series , all because of the treacherous first violin passage work in the last movement of beethoven 's fourth symphony . 
and we got talking about music , and i got an email from steve a few days later saying that nathaniel was interested in a violin lesson with me . 
now , i should mention that nathaniel refuses treatment because when he was treated it was with shock therapy and thorazine and handcuffs , and that scar has stayed with him for his entire life . 
but as a result now , he is prone to these schizophrenic episodes , the worst of which can manifest themselves as him exploding and then disappearing for days , wandering the streets of skid row , exposed to its horrors , with the torment of his own mind unleashed upon him . 
and nathaniel was in such a state of agitation when we started our first lesson at walt disney concert hall -- he had a kind of manic glint in his eyes , he was lost . 
and he was talking about invisible demons and smoke , and how someone was poisoning him in his sleep . 
and i was afraid , not for myself , but i was afraid that i was going to lose him , that he was going to sink into one of his states , and that i would ruin his relationship with the violin if i started talking about scales and arpeggios and other exciting forms of didactic violin pedagogy . 
so , i just started playing . 
and i played the first movement of the beethoven violin concerto . 
and as i played , i understood that there was a profound change occurring in nathaniel 's eyes . 
it was as if he was in the grip of some invisible pharmaceutical , a chemical reaction , for which my playing the music was its catalyst . 
and nathaniel 's manic rage was transformed into understanding , a quiet curiosity and grace . 
and in a miracle , he lifted his own violin and he started playing , by ear , certain snippets of violin concertos which he then asked me to complete -- mendelssohn , tchaikovsky , sibelius . 
and we started talking about music , from bach to beethoven and brahms , bruckner , all the b 's , from bartók , all the way up to esa-pekka salonen . 
and i understood that he not only had an encyclopedic knowledge of music , but he related to this music at a personal level . 
he spoke about it with the kind of passion and understanding that i share with my colleagues in the los angeles philharmonic . 
and through playing music and talking about music , this man had transformed from the paranoid , disturbed man that had just come from walking the streets of downtown los angeles to the charming , erudite , brilliant , juilliard-trained musician . 
music is medicine . music changes us . 
and for nathaniel , music is sanity . 
because music allows him to take his thoughts and delusions and shape them through his imagination and his creativity , into reality . 
and that is an escape from his tormented state . 
and i understood that this was the very essence of art . 
this was the very reason why we made music , that we take something that exists within all of us at our very fundamental core , our emotions , and through our artistic lens , through our creativity , we 're able to shape those emotions into reality . 
and the reality of that expression reaches all of us and moves us , inspires and unites us . 
and for nathaniel , music brought him back into a fold of friends . 
the redemptive power of music brought him back into a family of musicians that understood him , that recognized his talents and respected him . 
and i will always make music with nathaniel , whether we 're at walt disney concert hall or on skid row , because he reminds me why i became a musician . 
thank you . 
bruno giussani : thank you . thanks . 
robert gupta . 
robert gupta : i 'm going to play something that i shamelessly stole from cellists . 
so , please forgive me . 
what i 'm going to show you first , as quickly as i can , is some foundational work , some new technology that we brought to microsoft as part of an acquisition almost exactly a year ago . this is seadragon , and it 's an environment in which you can either locally or remotely interact with vast amounts of visual data . 
we 're looking at many , many gigabytes of digital photos here and kind of seamlessly and continuously zooming in , panning through the thing , rearranging it in any way we want . 
and it does n't matter how much information we 're looking at , how big these collections are or how big the images are . 
most of them are ordinary digital camera photos , but this one , for example , is a scan from the library of congress , and it 's in the 300 megapixel range . 
it does n't make any difference because the only thing that ought to limit the performance of a system like this one is the number of pixels on your screen at any given moment . it 's also very flexible architecture . 
this is an entire book , so this is an example of non-image data . 
this is `` bleak house '' by dickens . every column is a chapter . 
to prove to you that it 's really text , and not an image , we can do something like so , to really show that this is a real representation of the text ; it 's not a picture . 
maybe this is a kind of an artificial way to read an e-book . 
i would n't recommend it . 
this is a more realistic case . this is an issue of the guardian . 
every large image is the beginning of a section . 
and this really gives you the joy and the good experience of reading the real paper version of a magazine or a newspaper , which is an inherently multi-scale kind of medium . 
we 've also done a little something with the corner of this particular issue of the guardian . 
we 've made up a fake ad that 's very high resolution -- much higher than you 'd be able to get in an ordinary ad -- and we 've embedded extra content . 
if you want to see the features of this car , you can see it here . 
or other models , or even technical specifications . 
and this really gets at some of these ideas about really doing away with those limits on screen real estate . 
we hope that this means no more pop-ups and other kind of rubbish like that -- should n't be necessary . 
of course , mapping is one of those really obvious applications for a technology like this . 
and this one i really wo n't spend any time on , except to say that we have things to contribute to this field as well . 
but those are all the roads in the u.s. 
superimposed on top of a nasa geospatial image . 
so let 's pull up , now , something else . 
this is actually live on the web now ; you can go check it out . 
this is a project called photosynth , which really marries two different technologies . 
one of them is seadragon and the other is some very beautiful computer vision research done by noah snavely , a graduate student at the university of washington , co-advised by steve seitz at u.w. 
and rick szeliski at microsoft research . a very nice collaboration . 
and so this is live on the web . it 's powered by seadragon . 
you can see that when we kind of do these sorts of views , where we can dive through images and have this kind of multi-resolution experience . 
but the spatial arrangement of the images here is actually meaningful . 
the computer vision algorithms have registered these images together so that they correspond to the real space in which these shots -- all taken near grassi lakes in the canadian rockies -- all these shots were taken . so you see elements here of stabilized slide-show or panoramic imaging , and these things have all been related spatially . 
i 'm not sure if i have time to show you any other environments . 
there are some that are much more spatial . 
i would like to jump straight to one of noah 's original data-sets -- and this is from an early prototype of photosynth that we first got working in the summer -- to show you what i think is really the punch line behind this technology , the photosynth technology . and it 's not necessarily so apparent from looking at the environments that we 've put up on the website . 
we had to worry about the lawyers and so on . 
this is a reconstruction of notre dame cathedral that was done entirely computationally from images scraped from flickr . you just type notre dame into flickr , and you get some pictures of guys in t-shirts , and of the campus and so on . and each of these orange cones represents an image that was discovered to belong to this model . 
and so these are all flickr images , and they 've all been related spatially in this way . 
and we can just navigate in this very simple way . 
you know , i never thought that i 'd end up working at microsoft . 
it 's very gratifying to have this kind of reception here . 
i guess you can see this is lots of different types of cameras : it 's everything from cell phone cameras to professional slrs , quite a large number of them , stitched together in this environment . 
and if i can , i 'll find some of the sort of weird ones . 
so many of them are occluded by faces , and so on . 
somewhere in here there are actually a series of photographs -- here we go . 
this is actually a poster of notre dame that registered correctly . 
we can dive in from the poster to a physical view of this environment . 
what the point here really is is that we can do things with the social environment . this is now taking data from everybody -- from the entire collective memory of , visually , of what the earth looks like -- and link all of that together . 
all of those photos become linked together , and they make something emergent that 's greater than the sum of the parts . 
you have a model that emerges of the entire earth . 
think of this as the long tail to stephen lawler 's virtual earth work . 
and this is something that grows in complexity as people use it , and whose benefits become greater to the users as they use it . 
their own photos are getting tagged with meta-data that somebody else entered . 
if somebody bothered to tag all of these saints and say who they all are , then my photo of notre dame cathedral suddenly gets enriched with all of that data , and i can use it as an entry point to dive into that space , into that meta-verse , using everybody else 's photos , and do a kind of a cross-modal and cross-user social experience that way . 
and of course , a by-product of all of that is immensely rich virtual models of every interesting part of the earth , collected not just from overhead flights and from satellite images and so on , but from the collective memory . 
thank you so much . 
do i understand this right ? that what your software is going to allow , is that at some point , really within the next few years , all the pictures that are shared by anyone across the world are going to basically link together ? 
yes . what this is really doing is discovering . 
it 's creating hyperlinks , if you will , between images . 
and it 's doing that based on the content inside the images . 
and that gets really exciting when you think about the richness of the semantic information that a lot of those images have . 
like when you do a web search for images , you type in phrases , and the text on the web page is carrying a lot of information about what that picture is of . 
now , what if that picture links to all of your pictures ? 
then the amount of semantic interconnection and the amount of richness that comes out of that is really huge . it 's a classic network effect . 
blaise , that is truly incredible . congratulations . 
thanks so much . 
last year at ted i gave an introduction to the lhc . 
and i promised to come back and give you an update on how that machine worked . 
so this is it . and for those of you that were n't there , the lhc is the largest scientific experiment ever attempted -- 27 kilometers in circumference . 
its job is to recreate the conditions that were present less than a billionth of a second after the universe began , up to 600 million times a second . 
it 's nothing if not ambitious . 
this is the machine below geneva . 
we take the pictures of those mini-big bangs inside detectors . 
this is the one i work on . it 's called the atlas detector -- 44 meters wide , 22 meters in diameter . 
spectacular picture here of atlas under construction so you can see the scale . 
on the 10th of september last year we turned the machine on for the first time . 
and this picture was taken by atlas . 
it caused immense celebration in the control room . 
it 's a picture of the first beam particle going all the way around the lhc , colliding with a piece of the lhc deliberately , and showering particles into the detector . 
in other words , when we saw that picture on september 10th we knew the machine worked , which is a great triumph . 
i do n't know whether this got the biggest cheer , or this , when someone went onto google and saw the front page was like that . 
it means we made cultural impact as well as scientific impact . 
about a week later we had a problem with the machine , related actually to these bits of wire here -- these gold wires . 
those wires carry 13 thousand amps when the machine is working in full power . 
now the engineers amongst you will look at them and say , `` no they do n't . they 're small wires . '' 
they can do that because when they are very cold they are what 's called superconducting wire . 
so at minus 271 degrees , colder than the space between the stars , those wires can take that current . 
in one of the joints between over 9,000 magnets in lhc , there was a manufacturing defect . 
so the wire heated up slightly , and its 13,000 amps suddenly encountered electrical resistance . 
this was the result . 
now that 's more impressive when you consider those magnets weigh over 20 tons , and they moved about a foot . 
so we damaged about 50 of the magnets . 
we had to take them out , which we did . 
we reconditioned them all , fixed them . 
they 're all on their way back underground now . 
by the end of march the lhc will be intact again . 
we will switch it on , and we expect to take data in june or july , and continue with our quest to find out what the building blocks of the universe are . 
now of course , in a way those accidents reignite the debate about the value of science and engineering at the edge . it 's easy to refute . 
i think that the fact that it 's so difficult , the fact that we 're overreaching , is the value of things like the lhc . 
i will leave the final word to an english scientist , humphrey davy , who , i suspect , when defending his protege 's useless experiments -- his protege was michael faraday -- said this , `` nothing is so dangerous to the progress of the human mind than to assume that our views of science are ultimate , that there are no mysteries in nature , that our triumphs are complete , and that there are no new worlds to conquer . '' 
thank you . 
you know , i 've talked about some of these projects before -- about the human genome and what that might mean , and discovering new sets of genes . 
we 're actually starting at a new point : we 've been digitizing biology , and now we 're trying to go from that digital code into a new phase of biology with designing and synthesizing life . 
so , we 've always been trying to ask big questions . 
`` what is life ? '' is something that i think many biologists have been trying to understand at various levels . 
we 've tried various approaches , paring it down to minimal components . 
we 've been digitizing it now for almost 20 years ; when we sequenced the human genome , it was going from the analog world of biology into the digital world of the computer . 
now we 're trying to ask , `` can we regenerate life or can we create new life out of this digital universe ? '' 
this is the map of a small organism , mycoplasma genitalium , that has the smallest genome for a species that can self-replicate in the laboratory , and we 've been trying to just see if we can come up with an even smaller genome . 
we 're able to knock out on the order of 100 genes out of the 500 or so that are here . 
when we look at its metabolic map , it 's relatively simple compared to ours -- trust me , this is simple -- but when we look at all the genes that we can knock out one at a time , it 's very unlikely that this would yield a living cell . 
so we decided the only way forward was to actually synthesize this chromosome so we could vary the components to ask some of these most fundamental questions . 
and so we started down the road of : can we synthesize a chromosome ? 
can chemistry permit making these really large molecules where we 've never been before ? 
and if we do , can we boot up a chromosome ? 
a chromosome , by the way , is just a piece of inert chemical material . 
so , our pace of digitizing life has been increasing at an exponential pace . 
our ability to write the genetic code has been moving pretty slowly but has been increasing , and our latest point would put it on , now , an exponential curve . 
we started this over 15 years ago . 
it took several stages , in fact , starting with a bioethical review before we did the first experiments . 
but it turns out synthesizing dna is very difficult . 
there are tens of thousands of machines around the world that make small pieces of dna -- 30 to 50 letters in length -- and it 's a degenerate process , so the longer you make the piece , the more errors there are . 
so we had to create a new method for putting these little pieces together and correct all the errors . 
and this was our first attempt , starting with the digital information of the genome of phi x 174 . 
it 's a small virus that kills bacteria . 
we designed the pieces , went through our error correction and had a dna molecule of about 5,000 letters . 
the exciting phase came when we took this piece of inert chemical and put it in the bacteria , and the bacteria started to read this genetic code , made the viral particles . 
the viral particles then were released from the cells and came back and killed the e. coli . 
i was talking to the oil industry recently and i said they clearly understood that model . 
they laughed more than you guys are . 
and so , we think this is a situation where the software can actually build its own hardware in a biological system . 
but we wanted to go much larger : we wanted to build the entire bacterial chromosome -- it 's over 580,000 letters of genetic code -- so we thought we 'd build them in cassettes the size of the viruses so we could actually vary the cassettes to understand what the actual components of a living cell are . 
design is critical , and if you 're starting with digital information in the computer , that digital information has to be really accurate . 
when we first sequenced this genome in 1995 , the standard of accuracy was one error per 10,000 base pairs . 
we actually found , on resequencing it , 30 errors ; had we used that original sequence , it never would have been able to be booted up . 
part of the design is designing pieces that are 50 letters long that have to overlap with all the other 50-letter pieces to build smaller subunits we have to design so they can go together . 
we design unique elements into this . 
you may have read that we put watermarks in . 
think of this : we have a four-letter genetic code -- a , c , g and t . 
triplets of those letters code for roughly 20 amino acids , such that there 's a single letter designation for each of the amino acids . 
so we can use the genetic code to write out words , sentences , thoughts . 
initially , all we did was autograph it . 
some people were disappointed there was not poetry . 
we designed these pieces so we can just chew back with enzymes ; there are enzymes that repair them and put them together . 
and we started making pieces , starting with pieces that were 5,000 to 7,000 letters , put those together to make 24,000-letter pieces , then put sets of those going up to 72,000 . 
at each stage , we grew up these pieces in abundance so we could sequence them because we 're trying to create a process that 's extremely robust that you can see in a minute . 
we 're trying to get to the point of automation . 
so , this looks like a basketball playoff . 
when we get into these really large pieces over 100,000 base pairs , they wo n't any longer grow readily in e. coli -- it exhausts all the modern tools of molecular biology -- and so we turned to other mechanisms . 
we knew there 's a mechanism called homologous recombination that biology uses to repair dna that can put pieces together . 
here 's an example of it : there 's an organism called deinococcus radiodurans that can take three millions rads of radiation . 
you can see in the top panel , its chromosome just gets blown apart . 
twelve to 24 hours later , it put it back together exactly as it was before . 
we have thousands of organisms that can do this . 
these organisms can be totally desiccated ; they can live in a vacuum . 
i am absolutely certain that life can exist in outer space , move around , find a new aqueous environment . 
in fact , nasa has shown a lot of this is out there . 
here 's an actual micrograph of the molecule we built using these processes , actually just using yeast mechanisms with the right design of the pieces we put them in ; yeast puts them together automatically . 
this is not an electron micrograph ; this is just a regular photomicrograph . 
it 's such a large molecule we can see it with a light microscope . 
these are pictures over about a six-second period . 
so , this is the publication we had just a short while ago . 
this is over 580,000 letters of genetic code ; it 's the largest molecule ever made by humans of a defined structure . 
it 's over 300 million molecular weight . 
if we printed it out at a 10 font with no spacing , it takes 142 pages just to print this genetic code . 
well , how do we boot up a chromosome ? how do we activate this ? 
obviously , with a virus it 's pretty simple ; it 's much more complicated dealing with bacteria . 
it 's also simpler when you go into eukaryotes like ourselves : you can just pop out the nucleus and pop in another one , and that 's what you 've all heard about with cloning . 
with bacteria and archaea , the chromosome is integrated into the cell , but we recently showed that we can do a complete transplant of a chromosome from one cell to another and activate it . 
we purified a chromosome from one microbial species -- roughly , these two are as distant as human and mice -- we added a few extra genes so we could select for this chromosome , we digested it with enzymes to kill all the proteins , and it was pretty stunning when we put this in the cell -- and you 'll appreciate our very sophisticated graphics here . 
the new chromosome went into the cell . 
in fact , we thought this might be as far as it went , but we tried to design the process a little bit further . 
this is a major mechanism of evolution right here . 
we find all kinds of species that have taken up a second chromosome or a third one from somewhere , adding thousands of new traits in a second to that species . 
so , people who think of evolution as just one gene changing at a time have missed much of biology . 
there are enzymes called restriction enzymes that actually digest dna . 
the chromosome that was in the cell does n't have one ; the chromosome we put in does . 
it got expressed and it recognized the other chromosome as foreign material , chewed it up , and so we ended up just with a cell with the new chromosome . 
it turned blue because of the genes we put in it . 
and with a very short period of time , all the characteristics of one species were lost and it converted totally into the new species based on the new software that we put in the cell . 
all the proteins changed , the membranes changed ; when we read the genetic code , it 's exactly what we had transferred in . 
so , this may sound like genomic alchemy , but we can , by moving the software of dna around , change things quite dramatically . 
now i 've argued , this is not genesis ; this is building on three and a half billion years of evolution . 
and i 've argued that we 're about to perhaps create a new version of the cambrian explosion , where there 's massive new speciation based on this digital design . 
why do this ? 
i think this is pretty obvious in terms of some of the needs . 
we 're about to go from six and a half to nine billion people over the next 40 years . 
to put it in context for myself : i was born in 1946 . 
there are now three people on the planet for every one of us that existed in 1946 ; within 40 years , there 'll be four . 
we have trouble feeding , providing fresh , clean water , medicines , fuel for the six and a half billion . 
it 's going to be a stretch to do it for nine . 
we use over five billion tons of coal , 30 billion-plus barrels of oil -- that 's a hundred million barrels a day . 
when we try to think of biological processes or any process to replace that , it 's going to be a huge challenge . 
then of course , there 's all that co2 from this material that ends up in the atmosphere . 
we now , from our discovery around the world , have a database with about 20 million genes , and i like to think of these as the design components of the future . 
the electronics industry only had a dozen or so components , and look at the diversity that came out of that . 
we 're limited here primarily by a biological reality and our imagination . 
we now have techniques , because of these rapid methods of synthesis , to do what we 're calling combinatorial genomics . 
we have the ability now to build a large robot that can make a million chromosomes a day . 
when you think of processing these 20 million different genes or trying to optimize processes to produce octane or to produce pharmaceuticals , new vaccines , we can just with a small team , do more molecular biology than the last 20 years of all science . 
and it 's just standard selection : we can select for viability , chemical or fuel production , vaccine production , etc. . 
this is a screen snapshot of some true design software that we 're working on to actually be able to sit down and design species in the computer . 
you know , we do n't know necessarily what it 'll look like : we know exactly what their genetic code looks like . 
we 're focusing on now fourth-generation fuels . 
you 've seen recently , corn to ethanol is just a bad experiment . 
we have second - and third-generation fuels that will be coming out relatively soon that are sugar , to much higher-value fuels like octane or different types of butanol . 
but the only way we think that biology can have a major impact without further increasing the cost of food and limiting its availability is if we start with co2 as its feedstock , and so we 're working with designing cells to go down this road . 
and we think we 'll have the first fourth-generation fuels in about 18 months . 
sunlight and co2 is one method ... 
but in our discovery around the world , we have all kinds of other methods . 
this is an organism we described in 1996 . 
it lives in the deep ocean , about a mile and a half deep , almost at boiling-water temperatures . 
it takes co2 to methane using molecular hydrogen as its energy source . 
we 're looking to see if we can take captured co2 , which can easily be piped to sites , convert that co2 back into fuel to drive this process . 
so , in a short period of time , we think that we might be able to increase what the basic question is of `` what is life ? '' 
we truly , you know , have modest goals of replacing the whole petrol-chemical industry -- yeah . if you ca n't do that at ted , where can you ? -- become a major source of energy ... 
but also , we 're now working on using these same tools to come up with instant sets of vaccines . 
you 've seen this year with flu ; we 're always a year behind and a dollar short when it comes to the right vaccine . 
i think that can be changed by building combinatorial vaccines in advance . 
here 's what the future may begin to look like with changing , now , the evolutionary tree , speeding up evolution with synthetic bacteria , archaea and , eventually , eukaryotes . 
we 're a ways away from improving people : our goal is just to make sure that we have a chance to survive long enough to maybe do that . thank you very much . 
last year i showed these two slides so that demonstrate that the arctic ice cap , which for most of the last three million years has been the size of the lower 48 states , has shrunk by 40 percent . 
but this understates the seriousness of this particular problem because it does n't show the thickness of the ice . 
the arctic ice cap is , in a sense , the beating heart of the global climate system . 
it expands in winter and contracts in summer . 
the next slide i show you will be a rapid fast-forward of what 's happened over the last 25 years . 
the permanent ice is marked in red . 
as you see , it expands to the dark blue -- that 's the annual ice in winter , and it contracts in summer . 
the so-called permanent ice , five years old or older , you can see is almost like blood , spilling out of the body here . 
in 25 years it 's gone from this , to this . 
this is a problem because the warming heats up the frozen ground around the arctic ocean , where there is a massive amount of frozen carbon which , when it thaws , is turned into methane by microbes . 
compared to the total amount of global warming pollution in the atmosphere , that amount could double if we cross this tipping point . 
already in some shallow lakes in alaska , methane is actively bubbling up out of the water . 
professor katey walter from the university of alaska went out with another team to another shallow lake last winter . 
whoa ! 
she 's okay . the question is whether we will be . 
and one reason is , this enormous heat sink heats up greenland from the north . 
this is an annual melting river . 
but the volumes are much larger than ever . 
this is the kangerlussuaq river in southwest greenland . 
if you want to know how sea level rises from land-base ice melting this is where it reaches the sea . 
these flows are increasing very rapidly . 
at the other end of the planet , antarctica the largest mass of ice on the planet . 
last month scientists reported the entire continent is now in negative ice balance . 
and west antarctica cropped up on top some under-sea islands , is particularly rapid in its melting . 
that 's equal to 20 feet of sea level , as is greenland . 
in the himalayas , the third largest mass of ice : at the top you see new lakes , which a few years ago were glaciers . 
40 percent of all the people in the world get half of their drinking water from that melting flow . 
in the andes , this glacier is the source of drinking water for this city . 
the flows have increased . 
but when they go away , so does much of the drinking water . 
in california there has been a 40 percent decline in the sierra snowpack . 
this is hitting the reservoirs . 
and the predictions , as you 've read , are serious . 
this drying around the world has lead to a dramatic increase in fires . 
and the disasters around the world have been increasing at an absolutely extraordinary and unprecedented rate . 
four times as many in the last 30 years as in the previous 75 . 
this is a completely unsustainable pattern . 
if you look at in the context of history you can see what this is doing . 
in the last five years we 've added 70 million tons of co2 every 24 hours -- 25 million tons every day to the oceans . 
look carefully at the area of the eastern pacific , from the americas , extending westward , and on either side of the indian subcontinent , where there is a radical depletion of oxygen in the oceans . 
the biggest single cause of global warming , along with deforestation , which is 20 percent of it , is the burning of fossil fuels . 
oil is a problem , and coal is the most serious problem . 
the united states is one of the two largest emitters , along with china . 
and the proposal has been to build a lot more coal plants . 
but we 're beginning to see a sea change . 
here are the ones that have been cancelled in the last few years with some green alternatives proposed . 
however there is a political battle in our country . 
and the coal industries and the oil industries spent a quarter of a billion dollars in the last calendar year promoting clean coal , which is an oxymoron . 
that image reminded me of something . 
around christmas , in my home in tennessee , a billion gallons of coal sludge was spilled . 
you probably saw it on the news . 
this , all over the country , is the second largest waste stream in america . 
this happened around christmas . 
one of the coal industry 's ads around christmas was this one . 
frosty the coal man is a jolly , happy soul . 
he 's abundant here in america , and he helps our economy grow . 
frosty the coal man is getting cleaner everyday . 
he 's affordable and adorable , and workers keep their pay . 
this is the source of much of the coal in west virginia . 
the largest mountaintop miner is the head of massey coal . 
let me be clear about it . al gore , nancy pelosi , harry reid , they do n't know what they 're talking about . 
so the alliance for climate protection has launched two campaigns . 
this is one of them , part of one of them . 
at coalergy we view climate change as a very serious threat to our business . 
that 's why we 've made it our primary goal to spend a large sum of money on an advertising effort to help bring out and complicate the truth about coal . 
the fact is , coal is n't dirty . 
we think it 's clean -- smells good , too . 
so do n't worry about climate change . 
leave that up to us . 
clean coal -- you 've heard a lot about it . 
so let 's take a tour of this state-of-the-art clean coal facility . 
amazing ! the machinery is kind of loud . 
but that 's the sound of clean coal technology . 
and while burning coal is one of the leading causes of global warming , the remarkable clean coal technology you see here changes everything . 
take a good long look : this is today 's clean coal technology . 
finally , the positive alternative meshes with our economic challenge and our national security challenge . 
america is in crisis -- the economy , national security , the climate crisis . 
the thread that links them all : our addiction to carbon based fuels , like dirty coal and foreign oil . 
but now there is a bold new solution to get us out of this mess . 
repower america with 100 percent clean electricity within 10 years . 
a plan to put america back to work , make us more secure , and help stop global warming . 
finally , a solution that 's big enough to solve our problems . 
repower america . find out more . 
this is the last one . 
it 's about repowering america . 
one of the fastest ways to cut our dependence on old dirty fuels that are killing our planet . 
future 's over here . wind , sun , a new energy grid . 
new investments to create high-paying jobs . 
repower america . it 's time to get real . 
there is an old african proverb that says , `` if you want to go quickly , go alone . 
if you want to go far , go together . '' 
we need to go far , quickly . 
i 'd like to share with you a discovery that i made a few months ago while writing an article for italian wired . 
i always keep my thesaurus handy whenever i 'm writing anything , but i 'd already finished editing the piece , and i realized that i had never once in my life looked up the word `` disabled '' to see what i 'd find . 
let me read you the entry . 
`` disabled , adjective : crippled , helpless , useless , wrecked , stalled , maimed , wounded , mangled , lame , mutilated , run-down , worn-out , weakened , impotent , castrated , paralyzed , handicapped , senile , decrepit , laid-up , done-up , done-for , done-in cracked-up , counted-out ; see also hurt , useless and weak . 
antonyms , healthy , strong , capable . '' 
i was reading this list out loud to a friend and at first was laughing , it was so ludicrous , but i 'd just gotten past `` mangled , '' and my voice broke , and i had to stop and collect myself from the emotional shock and impact that the assault from these words unleashed . 
you know , of course , this is my raggedy old thesaurus so i 'm thinking this must be an ancient print date , right ? 
but , in fact , the print date was the early 1980s , when i would have been starting primary school and forming an understanding of myself outside the family unit and as related to the other kids and the world around me . 
and , needless to say , thank god i was n't using a thesaurus back then . 
i mean , from this entry , it would seem that i was born into a world that perceived someone like me to have nothing positive whatsoever going for them , when in fact , today i 'm celebrated for the opportunities and adventures my life has procured . 
so , i immediately went to look up the 2009 online edition , expecting to find a revision worth noting . 
here 's the updated version of this entry . 
unfortunately , it 's not much better . 
i find the last two words under `` near antonyms , '' particularly unsettling : `` whole '' and `` wholesome . '' 
so , it 's not just about the words . 
it 's what we believe about people when we name them with these words . 
it 's about the values behind the words , and how we construct those values . 
our language affects our thinking and how we view the world and how we view other people . 
in fact , many ancient societies , including the greeks and the romans , believed that to utter a curse verbally was so powerful , because to say the thing out loud brought it into existence . 
so , what reality do we want to call into existence : a person who is limited , or a person who 's empowered ? 
by casually doing something as simple as naming a person , a child , we might be putting lids and casting shadows on their power . 
would n't we want to open doors for them instead ? 
one such person who opened doors for me was my childhood doctor at the a.i. dupont institute in wilmington , delaware . 
his name was dr. pizzutillo , an italian american , whose name , apparently , was too difficult for most americans to pronounce , so he went by dr. p . 
and dr. p always wore really colorful bow ties and had the very perfect disposition to work with children . 
i loved almost everything about my time spent at this hospital , with the exception of my physical therapy sessions . 
i had to do what seemed like innumerable repetitions of exercises with these thick , elastic bands -- different colors , you know -- to help build up my leg muscles , and i hated these bands more than anything -- i hated them , had names for them . i hated them . 
and , you know , i was already bargaining , as a five year-old child , with dr. p to try to get out of doing these exercises , unsuccessfully , of course . 
and , one day , he came in to my session -- exhaustive and unforgiving , these sessions -- and he said to me , `` wow . aimee , you are such a strong and powerful little girl , i think you 're going to break one of those bands . 
when you do break it , i 'm going to give you a hundred bucks . '' 
now , of course , this was a simple ploy on dr. p 's part to get me to do the exercises i did n't want to do before the prospect of being the richest five-year-old in the second floor ward , but what he effectively did for me was reshape an awful daily occurrence into a new and promising experience for me . 
and i have to wonder today to what extent his vision and his declaration of me as a strong and powerful little girl shaped my own view of myself as an inherently strong , powerful and athletic person well into the future . 
this is an example of how adults in positions of power can ignite the power of a child . 
but , in the previous instances of those thesaurus entries , our language is n't allowing us to evolve into the reality that we would all want , the possibility of an individual to see themselves as capable . 
our language has n't caught up with the changes in our society , many of which have been brought about by technology . 
certainly , from a medical standpoint , my legs , laser surgery for vision impairment , titanium knees and hip replacements for aging bodies that are allowing people to more fully engage with their abilities , and move beyond the limits that nature has imposed on them -- not to mention social networking platforms allow people to self-identify , to claim their own descriptions of themselves , so they can go align with global groups of their own choosing . 
so , perhaps technology is revealing more clearly to us now what has always been a truth : that everyone has something rare and powerful to offer our society , and that the human ability to adapt is our greatest asset . 
the human ability to adapt , it 's an interesting thing , because people have continually wanted to talk to me about overcoming adversity , and i 'm going to make an admission : this phrase never sat right with me , and i always felt uneasy trying to answer people 's questions about it , and i think i 'm starting to figure out why . 
implicit in this phrase of `` overcoming adversity '' is the idea that success , or happiness , is about emerging on the other side of a challenging experience unscathed or unmarked by the experience , as if my successes in life have come about from an ability to sidestep or circumnavigate the presumed pitfalls of a life with prosthetics , or what other people perceive as my disability . 
but , in fact , we are changed . we are marked , of course , by a challenge , whether physically , emotionally or both . 
and i 'm going to suggest that this is a good thing . 
adversity is n't an obstacle that we need to get around in order to resume living our life . 
it 's part of our life . 
and i tend to think of it like my shadow . 
sometimes i see a lot of it , sometimes there 's very little , but it 's always with me . 
and , certainly , i 'm not trying to diminish the impact , the weight , of a person 's struggle . 
there is adversity and challenge in life , and it 's all very real and relative to every single person , but the question is n't whether or not you 're going to meet adversity , but how you 're going to meet it . 
so , our responsibility is not simply shielding those we care for from adversity , but preparing them to meet it well . 
and we do a disservice to our kids when we make them feel that they 're not equipped to adapt . 
there 's an important difference and distinction between the objective medical fact of my being an amputee and the subjective societal opinion of whether or not i 'm disabled . 
and , truthfully , the only real and consistent disability i 've had to confront is the world ever thinking that i could be described by those definitions . 
in our desire to protect those we care about by giving them the cold , hard truth about their medical prognosis , or , indeed , a prognosis on the expected quality of their life , we have to make sure that we do n't put the first brick in a wall that will actually disable someone . 
perhaps the existing model of only looking at what is broken in you and how do we fix it , serves to be more disabling to the individual than the pathology itself . 
by not treating the wholeness of a person , by not acknowledging their potency , we are creating another ill on top of whatever natural struggle they might have . 
we are effectively grading someone 's worth to our community . 
so we need to see through the pathology and into the range of human capability . 
and , most importantly , there 's a partnership between those perceived deficiencies and our greatest creative ability . 
so it 's not about devaluing , or negating , these more trying times as something we want to avoid or sweep under the rug , but instead to find those opportunities wrapped in the adversity . 
so maybe the idea i want to put out there is not so much overcoming adversity as it is opening ourselves up to it , embracing it , grappling with it , to use a wrestling term , maybe even dancing with it . 
and , perhaps , if we see adversity as natural , consistent and useful , we 're less burdened by the presence of it . 
this year we celebrate the 200th birthday of charles darwin , and it was 150 years ago , when writing about evolution , that darwin illustrated , i think , a truth about the human character . 
to paraphrase : it 's not the strongest of the species that survives , nor is it the most intelligent that survives ; it is the one that is most adaptable to change . 
conflict is the genesis of creation . 
from darwin 's work , amongst others , we can recognize that the human ability to survive and flourish is driven by the struggle of the human spirit through conflict into transformation . 
so , again , transformation , adaptation , is our greatest human skill . 
and , perhaps , until we 're tested , we do n't know what we 're made of . 
maybe that 's what adversity gives us : a sense of self , a sense of our own power . 
so , we can give ourselves a gift . 
we can re-imagine adversity as something more than just tough times . 
maybe we can see it as change . 
adversity is just change that we have n't adapted ourselves to yet . 
i think the greatest adversity that we 've created for ourselves is this idea of normalcy . 
now , who 's normal ? 
there 's no normal . 
there 's common , there 's typical . there 's no normal , and would you want to meet that poor , beige person if they existed ? 
i do n't think so . 
if we can change this paradigm from one of achieving normalcy to one of possibility -- or potency , to be even a little bit more dangerous -- we can release the power of so many more children , and invite them to engage their rare and valuable abilities with the community . 
anthropologists tell us that the one thing we as humans have always required of our community members is to be of use , to be able to contribute . 
there 's evidence that neanderthals , 60,000 years ago , carried their elderly and those with serious physical injury , and perhaps it 's because the life experience of survival of these people proved of value to the community . 
they did n't view these people as broken and useless ; they were seen as rare and valuable . 
a few years ago , i was in a food market in the town where i grew up in that red zone in northeastern pennsylvania , and i was standing over a bushel of tomatoes . 
it was summertime : i had shorts on . 
i hear this guy , his voice behind me say , `` well , if it is n't aimee mullins . '' 
and i turn around , and it 's this older man . i have no idea who he is . 
and i said , `` i 'm sorry , sir , have we met ? i do n't remember meeting you . '' 
he said , `` well , you would n't remember meeting me . 
i mean , when we met i was delivering you from your mother 's womb . '' 
oh , that guy . 
and , but of course , actually , it did click . 
this man was dr. kean , a man that i had only known about through my mother 's stories of that day , because , of course , typical fashion , i arrived late for my birthday by two weeks . 
and so my mother 's prenatal physician had gone on vacation , so the man who delivered me was a complete stranger to my parents . 
and , because i was born without the fibula bones , and had feet turned in , and a few toes in this foot and a few toes in that , he had to be the bearer -- this stranger had to be the bearer of bad news . 
he said to me , `` i had to give this prognosis to your parents that you would never walk , and you would never have the kind of mobility that other kids have or any kind of life of independence , and you 've been making liar out of me ever since . '' 
the extraordinary thing is that he said he had saved newspaper clippings throughout my whole childhood , whether winning a second grade spelling bee , marching with the girl scouts , you know , the halloween parade , winning my college scholarship , or any of my sports victories , and he was using it , and integrating it into teaching resident students , med students from hahnemann medical school and hershey medical school . 
and he called this part of the course the x factor , the potential of the human will . 
no prognosis can account for how powerful this could be as a determinant in the quality of someone 's life . 
and dr. kean went on to tell me , he said , `` in my experience , unless repeatedly told otherwise , and even if given a modicum of support , if left to their own devices , a child will achieve . '' 
see , dr. kean made that shift in thinking . 
he understood that there 's a difference between the medical condition and what someone might do with it . 
and there 's been a shift in my thinking over time , in that , if you had asked me at 15 years old , if i would have traded prosthetics for flesh-and-bone legs , i would n't have hesitated for a second . 
i aspired to that kind of normalcy back then . 
but if you ask me today , i 'm not so sure . 
and it 's because of the experiences i 've had with them , not in spite of the experiences i 've had with them . 
and perhaps this shift in me has happened because i 've been exposed to more people who have opened doors for me than those who have put lids and cast shadows on me . 
see , all you really need is one person to show you the epiphany of your own power , and you 're off . 
if you can hand somebody the key to their own power -- the human spirit is so receptive -- if you can do that and open a door for someone at a crucial moment , you are educating them in the best sense . 
you 're teaching them to open doors for themselves . 
in fact , the exact meaning of the word `` educate '' comes from the root word `` educe . '' 
it means `` to bring forth what is within , to bring out potential . '' 
so again , which potential do we want to bring out ? 
there was a case study done in 1960s britain , when they were moving from grammar schools to comprehensive schools . 
it 's called the streaming trials . we call it `` tracking '' here in the states . 
it 's separating students from a , b , c , d and so on . 
and the `` a students '' get the tougher curriculum , the best teachers , etc. . 
well , they took , over a three-month period , d-level students , gave them a 's , told them they were `` a 's , '' told them they were bright , and at the end of this three-month period , they were performing at a-level . 
and , of course , the heartbreaking , flip side of this study , is that they took the `` a students '' and told them they were `` d 's . '' 
and that 's what happened at the end of that three-month period . 
those who were still around in school , besides the people who had dropped out . 
a crucial part of this case study was that the teachers were duped too . 
the teachers did n't know a switch had been made . 
they were simply told , `` these are the ` a-students , ' these are the ' d - students . ' '' and that 's how they went about teaching them and treating them . 
so , i think that the only true disability is a crushed spirit , a spirit that 's been crushed does n't have hope , it does n't see beauty , it no longer has our natural , childlike curiosity and our innate ability to imagine . 
if instead , we can bolster a human spirit to keep hope , to see beauty in themselves and others , to be curious and imaginative , then we are truly using our power well . 
when a spirit has those qualities , we are able to create new realities and new ways of being . 
i 'd like to leave you with a poem by a fourteenth-century persian poet named hafiz that my friend , jacques dembois told me about , and the poem is called `` the god who only knows four words '' : `` every child has known god , not the god of names , not the god of do n'ts , but the god who only knows four words and keeps repeating them , saying , ` come dance with me . 
come , dance with me . come , dance with me . ' '' thank you . 
if i can leave you with one big idea today , it 's that the whole of the data in which we consume is greater that the sum of the parts , and instead of thinking about information overload , what i 'd like you to think about is how we can use information so that patterns pop and we can see trends that would otherwise be invisible . 
so what we 're looking at right here is a typical mortality chart organized by age . 
this tool that i 'm using here is a little experiment . 
it 's called pivot , and with pivot what i can do is i can choose to filter in one particular cause of deaths -- say , accidents . 
and , right away , i see there 's a different pattern that emerges . 
this is because , in the mid-area here , people are at their most active , and over here they 're at their most frail . 
we can step back out again and then reorganize the data by cause of death , seeing that circulatory diseases and cancer are the usual suspects , but not for everyone . 
if we go ahead and we filter by age -- say 40 years or less -- we see that accidents are actually the greatest cause that people have to be worried about . 
and if you drill into that , it 's especially the case for men . 
so you get the idea that viewing information , viewing data in this way , is a lot like swimming in a living information info-graphic . 
and if we can do this for raw data , why not do it for content as well ? 
so what we have right here is the cover of every single sports illustrated ever produced . 
it 's all here ; it 's all on the web . 
you can go back to your rooms and try this after my talk . 
with pivot , you can drill into a decade . 
you can drill into a particular year . 
you can jump right into a specific issue . 
so i 'm looking at this ; i see the athletes that have appeared in this issue , the sports . 
i 'm a lance armstrong fan , so i 'll go ahead and i 'll click on that , which reveals , for me , all the issues in which lance armstrong 's been a part of . 
now , if i want to just kind of take a peek at these , i might think , `` well , what about taking a look at all of cycling ? '' 
so i can step back , and expand on that . 
and i see greg lemond now . 
and so you get the idea that when you navigate over information this way -- going narrower , broader , backing in , backing out -- you 're not searching , you 're not browsing . 
you 're doing something that 's actually a little bit different . 
it 's in between , and we think it changes the way information can be used . 
so i want to extrapolate on this idea a bit with something that 's a little bit crazy . 
what we 're done here is we 've taken every single wikipedia page and we reduced it down to a little summary . 
so the summary consists of just a little synopsis and an icon to indicate the topical area that it comes from . 
i 'm only showing the top 500 most popular wikipedia pages right here . 
but even in this limited view , we can do a lot of things . 
right away , we get a sense of what are the topical domains that are most popular on wikipedia . 
i 'm going to go ahead and select government . 
now , having selected government , i can now see that the wikipedia categories that most frequently correspond to that are time magazine people of the year . 
so this is really important because this is an insight that was not contained within any one wikipedia page . 
it 's only possible to see that insight when you step back and look at all of them . 
looking at one of these particular summaries , i can then drill into the concept of time magazine person of the year , bringing up all of them . 
so looking at these people , i can see that the majority come from government ; some have come from natural sciences ; some , fewer still , have come from business -- there 's my boss -- and one has come from music . 
and interestingly enough , bono is also a ted prize winner . 
so we can go , jump , and take a look at all the ted prize winners . 
so you see , we 're navigating the web for the first time as if it 's actually a web , not from page-to-page , but at a higher level of abstraction . 
and so i want to show you one other thing that may catch you a little bit by surprise . 
i 'm just showing the new york times website here . 
so pivot , this application -- i do n't want to call it a browser ; it 's really not a browser , but you can view web pages with it -- and we bring that zoomable technology to every single web page like this . 
so i can step back , pop right back into a specific section . 
now the reason why this is important is because , by virtue of just viewing web pages in this way , i can look at my entire browsing history in the exact same way . 
so i can drill into what i 've done over specific time frames . 
here , in fact , is the state of all the demo that i just gave . 
and i can sort of replay some stuff that i was looking at earlier today . 
and , if i want to step back and look at everything , i can slice and dice my history , perhaps by my search history -- here , i was doing some nepotistic searching , looking for bing , over here for live labs pivot . 
and from these , i can drill into the web page and just launch them again . 
it 's one metaphor repurposed multiple times , and in each case it makes the whole greater than the sum of the parts with the data . 
so right now , in this world , we think about data as being this curse . 
we talk about the curse of information overload . 
we talk about drowning in data . 
what if we can actually turn that upside down and turn the web upside down , so that instead of navigating from one thing to the next , we get used to the habit of being able to go from many things to many things , and then being able to see the patterns that were otherwise hidden ? 
if we can do that , then instead of being trapped in data , we might actually extract information . 
and , instead of dealing just with information , we can tease out knowledge . 
and if we get the knowledge , then maybe even there 's wisdom to be found . 
so with that , i thank you . 
several years ago here at ted , peter skillman introduced a design challenge called the marshmallow challenge . 
and the idea 's pretty simple : teams of four have to build the tallest free-standing structure out of 20 sticks of spaghetti , one yard of tape , one yard of string and a marshmallow . 
the marshmallow has to be on top . 
and , though it seems really simple , it 's actually pretty hard because it forces people to collaborate very quickly . 
and so , i thought this was an interesting idea , and i incorporated it into a design workshop . 
and it was a huge success . 
and since then , i 've conducted about 70 design workshops across the world with students and designers and architects , even the ctos of the fortune 50 , and there 's something about this exercise that reveals very deep lessons about the nature of collaboration , and i 'd like to share some of them with you . 
so , normally , most people begin by orienting themselves to the task . 
they talk about it , they figure out what it 's going to look like , they jockey for power . 
then they spend some time planning , organizing , they sketch and they lay out spaghetti . 
they spend the majority of their time assembling the sticks into ever-growing structures . 
and then finally , just as they 're running out of time , someone takes out the marshmallow , and then they gingerly put it on top , and then they stand back , and -- ta-da ! -- they admire their work . 
but what really happens , most of the time , is that the `` ta-da '' turns into an `` uh-oh , '' because the weight of the marshmallow causes the entire structure to buckle and to collapse . 
so there are a number of people who have a lot more `` uh-oh '' moments than others , and among the worst are recent graduates of business school . 
they lie , they cheat , they get distracted and they produce really lame structures . 
and of course there are teams that have a lot more `` ta-da '' structures , and among the best are recent graduates of kindergarten . 
and it 's pretty amazing . 
as peter tells us , not only do they produce the tallest structures , but they 're the most interesting structures of them all . 
so the question you want to ask is : how come ? why ? what is it about them ? 
and peter likes to say that none of the kids spend any time trying to be ceo of spaghetti , inc. . right ? 
they do n't spend time jockeying for power . 
but there 's another reason as well . 
and the reason is that business students are trained to find the single right plan , right ? 
and then they execute on it . 
and then what happens is , when they put the marshmallow on the top , they run out of time and what happens ? 
it 's a crisis . 
sound familiar ? right . 
what kindergarteners do differently is that they start with the marshmallow , and they build prototypes , successive prototypes , always keeping the marshmallow on top , so they have multiple times to fix when they build prototypes along the way . 
designers recognize this type of collaboration as the essence of the iterative process . 
and with each version , kids get instant feedback about what works and what does n't work . 
so the capacity to play in prototype is really essential , but let 's look at how different teams perform . 
so the average for most people is around 20 inches ; business schools students , about half of that ; lawyers , a little better , but not much better than that , kindergarteners , better than most adults . 
who does the very best ? 
architects and engineers , thankfully . 
thirty-nine inches is the tallest structure i 've seen . 
and why is it ? because they understand triangles and self-reinforcing geometrical patterns are the key to building stable structures . 
so ceos , a little bit better than average , but here 's where it gets interesting . 
if you put you put an executive admin . on the team , they get significantly better . 
it 's incredible . you know , you look around , you go , `` oh , that team 's going to win . '' 
you can just tell beforehand . and why is that ? 
because they have special skills of facilitation . 
they manage the process , they understand the process . 
and any team who manages and pays close attention to work will significantly improve the team 's performance . 
specialized skills and facilitation skills are the combination that leads to strong success . 
if you have 10 teams that typically perform , you 'll get maybe six or so that have standing structures . 
and i tried something interesting . 
i thought , let 's up the ante , once . 
so i offered a 10,000 dollar prize of software to the winning team . 
so what do you think happened to these design students ? 
what was the result ? 
here 's what happened : not one team had a standing structure . 
if anyone had built , say , a one inch structure , they would have taken home the prize . 
so , is n't that interesting ? that high stakes have a strong impact . 
we did the exercise again with the same students . 
what do you think happened then ? 
so now they understand the value of prototyping . 
so the same team went from being the very worst to being among the very best . 
they produced the tallest structures in the least amount of time . 
so there 's deep lessons for us about the nature of incentives and success . 
so , you might ask : why would anyone actually spend time writing a marshmallow challenge ? 
and the reason is , i help create digital tools and processes to help teams build cars and video games and visual effects . 
and what the marshmallow challenge does is it helps them identify the hidden assumptions . 
the challenge provides a shared experience , a common language , a common stance to build the right prototype . 
and so , this is the value of the experience , of this so simple exercise . 
and those of you who are interested may want to go to marshmallowchallenge.com . 
it 's a blog that you can look at how to build the marshmallows . 
there 's step-by-step instructions on this . 
there are crazy examples from around the world of how people tweak and adjust the system . 
there 's world records that are on this as well . 
and the fundamental lesson , i believe , is that design truly is a contact sport . 
it demands that we bring all of our senses to the task , and that we apply the very best of our thinking , our feeling and our doing to the challenge that we have at hand . 
and sometimes , a little prototype of this experience is all that it takes to turn us from an `` uh-oh '' moment to a `` ta-da '' moment . 
and that can make a big difference . 
thank you very much . 
now -- -- the problem -- the problem is that even those of us sympathetic with the plight of indigenous people view them as quaint and colorful but somehow reduced to the margins of history as the real world , meaning our world , moves on . 
well , the truth is the 20th century , 300 years from now , is not going to be remembered for its wars or its technological innovations , but rather as the era in which we stood by and either actively endorsed or passively accepted the massive destruction of both biological and cultural diversity on the planet . now , the problem is n't change . 
all cultures through all time have constantly been engaged in a dance with new possibilities of life . 
and the problem is not technology itself . 
the sioux indians did not stop being sioux when they gave up the bow and arrow any more than an american stopped being an american when he gave up the horse and buggy . 
it 's not change or technology that threatens the integrity of the ethnosphere . it is power , the crude face of domination . 
wherever you look around the world , you discover that these are not cultures destined to fade away ; these are dynamic living peoples being driven out of existence by identifiable forces that are beyond their capacity to adapt to : whether it 's the egregious deforestation in the homeland of the penan -- a nomadic people from southeast asia , from sarawak -- a people who lived free in the forest until a generation ago , and now have all been reduced to servitude and prostitution on the banks of the rivers , where you can see the river itself is soiled with the silt that seems to be carrying half of borneo away to the south china sea , where the japanese freighters hang light in the horizon ready to fill their holds with raw logs ripped from the forest -- or , in the case of the yanomami , it 's the disease entities that have come in , in the wake of the discovery of gold . 
or if we go into the mountains of tibet , where i 'm doing a lot of research recently , you 'll see it 's a crude face of political domination . 
you know , genocide , the physical extinction of a people is universally condemned , but ethnocide , the destruction of people 's way of life , is not only not condemned , it 's universally , in many quarters , celebrated as part of a development strategy . 
and you can not understand the pain of tibet until you move through it at the ground level . 
i once travelled 6,000 miles from chengdu in western china overland through southeastern tibet to lhasa with a young colleague , and it was only when i got to lhasa that i understood the face behind the statistics you hear about : 6,000 sacred monuments torn apart to dust and ashes , 1.2 million people killed by the cadres during the cultural revolution . 
this young man 's father had been ascribed to the panchen lama . 
that meant he was instantly killed at the time of the chinese invasion . 
his uncle fled with his holiness in the diaspora that took the people to nepal . 
his mother was incarcerated for the crime of being wealthy . 
he was smuggled into the jail at the age of two to hide beneath her skirt tails because she could n't bear to be without him . 
the sister who had done that brave deed was put into an education camp . 
one day she inadvertently stepped on an armband of mao , and for that transgression , she was given seven years of hard labor . 
the pain of tibet can be impossible to bear , but the redemptive spirit of the people is something to behold . 
and in the end , then , it really comes down to a choice : do we want to live in a monochromatic world of monotony or do we want to embrace a polychromatic world of diversity ? 
margaret mead , the great anthropologist , said , before she died , that her greatest fear was that as we drifted towards this blandly amorphous generic world view not only would we see the entire range of the human imagination reduced to a more narrow modality of thought , but that we would wake from a dream one day having forgotten there were even other possibilities . 
and it 's humbling to remember that our species has , perhaps , been around for -lsb- 150,000 -rsb- years . 
the neolithic revolution -- which gave us agriculture , at which time we succumbed to the cult of the seed ; the poetry of the shaman was displaced by the prose of the priesthood ; we created hierarchy specialization surplus -- is only 10,000 years ago . 
the modern industrial world as we know it is barely 300 years old . 
now , that shallow history does n't suggest to me that we have all the answers for all of the challenges that will confront us in the ensuing millennia . 
when these myriad cultures of the world are asked the meaning of being human , they respond with 10,000 different voices . 
and it 's within that song that we will all rediscover the possibility of being what we are : a fully conscious species , fully aware of ensuring that all peoples and all gardens find a way to flourish . and there are great moments of optimism . 
this is a photograph i took at the northern tip of baffin island when i went narwhal hunting with some inuit people , and this man , olayuk , told me a marvelous story of his grandfather . 
the canadian government has not always been kind to the inuit people , and during the 1950s , to establish our sovereignty , we forced them into settlements . 
this old man 's grandfather refused to go . 
the family , fearful for his life , took away all of his weapons , all of his tools . 
now , you must understand that the inuit did not fear the cold ; they took advantage of it . 
the runners of their sleds were originally made of fish wrapped in caribou hide . 
so , this man 's grandfather was not intimidated by the arctic night or the blizzard that was blowing . 
he simply slipped outside , pulled down his sealskin trousers and defecated into his hand . and as the feces began to freeze , he shaped it into the form of a blade . 
he put a spray of saliva on the edge of the shit knife and as it finally froze solid , he butchered a dog with it . 
he skinned the dog and improvised a harness , took the ribcage of the dog and improvised a sled , harnessed up an adjacent dog , and disappeared over the ice floes , shit knife in belt . 
talk about getting by with nothing . 
and this , in many ways -- -- is a symbol of the resilience of the inuit people and of all indigenous people around the world . 
the canadian government in april of 1999 gave back to total control of the inuit an area of land larger than california and texas put together . 
it 's our new homeland . it 's called nunavut . 
it 's an independent territory . they control all mineral resources . 
an amazing example of how a nation-state can seek restitution with its people . 
and finally , in the end , i think it 's pretty obvious at least to all of all us who 've traveled in these remote reaches of the planet , to realize that they 're not remote at all . 
they 're homelands of somebody . 
they represent branches of the human imagination that go back to the dawn of time . and for all of us , the dreams of these children , like the dreams of our own children , become part of the naked geography of hope . 
so , what we 're trying to do at the national geographic , finally , is , we believe that politicians will never accomplish anything . 
we think that polemics -- -- we think that polemics are not persuasive , but we think that storytelling can change the world , and so we are probably the best storytelling institution in the world . we get 35 million hits on our website every month . 
156 nations carry our television channel . 
our magazines are read by millions . 
and what we 're doing is a series of journeys to the ethnosphere where we 're going to take our audience to places of such cultural wonder that they can not help but come away dazzled by what they have seen , and hopefully , therefore , embrace gradually , one by one , the central revelation of anthropology : that this world deserves to exist in a diverse way , that we can find a way to live in a truly multicultural , pluralistic world where all of the wisdom of all peoples can contribute to our collective well-being . 
thank you very much . 
